.\" gzippy-tuning(7) — how to pick threads, blocks, and levels.
.TH GZIPPY-TUNING 7 2026-04-24 "gzippy 0.2.0" "Miscellaneous"
.
.SH NAME
gzippy-tuning \- how to pick threads, block size, and compression level
.
.SH DESCRIPTION
This page is a tutorial for getting the most out of
.BR gzippy (1).
Read it once; the rules fit in a napkin.
.
.SH THE THREE KNOBS
gzippy has three knobs that matter for performance:
.TP
.B -p
Number of threads. Defaults to every online CPU.
.TP
.B -b
Block size for parallel work. Defaults to 128K.
.TP
.B -1 " \(em " --max
Compression level. Defaults to
.BR -6 .
.PP
Everything else is plumbing. If you want a single rule:
.IP
.EX
gzippy -9 file
.EE
.PP
will make most people happy most of the time.
.
.SH PICK A LEVEL
.TS
l l l.
Level	Speed	Use when
\_	\_	\_
-0	infinite	Input is already compressed (video, JPEG, encrypted)
-1	fastest	Log rotation, ephemeral data, a tight loop
-6	fast	The default. Covers 90% of real use
-9	slower	You are storing this for a while
--ultra (11)	much slower	Archive you will ship once, read often
--max (12)	slowest	You want zopfli but can't wait hours
-H	fastest	Huffman only; last-resort when LZ77 finds nothing
.TE
.PP
The ratio gain from
.B -6
to
.B -9
on real text is 3\(en5%. The time cost is 2\(en3x. The gain from
.B -9
to
.BR --max
is another 3\(en5%, at 10\(en30x the time. Decide if those bytes are worth it.
.
.SH PICK A THREAD COUNT
Default is fine. If you want the detail:
.IP \(bu 2
gzippy is embarrassingly parallel on input larger than one block. Throughput
scales linearly with cores until memory bandwidth saturates (typically
12\(en16 cores on a modern laptop).
.IP \(bu 2
At
.B -p1
gzippy emits plain single-member gzip. No "GZ" subfield, no block framing.
Useful if you need output that is byte-identical to pigz
.BR -p1 .
.IP \(bu 2
On small input (under one block), extra threads are overhead. gzippy detects
this and collapses to a single-threaded path.
.IP \(bu 2
On bandwidth-limited hardware (Raspberry Pi, cheap VPS), fewer threads may
be faster. Measure.
.
.SH PICK A BLOCK SIZE
Default (128K) is tuned for pigz compatibility and memory locality. Reasons
to change it:
.TP
.B Bigger blocks (256K\(en1M)
Slightly better ratio because the deflate matcher has more context per
block. Slightly higher per-block latency. Use
.B -b 1m
when you have huge input, fast disks, and you care more about size than
latency.
.TP
.B Smaller blocks (32K, 64K)
Faster response to slow input, more parallelism on short files. Worse
ratio. Rarely useful unless you are piping from a slow producer.
.TP
.B --independent ( -i )
Forces no cross-block state. Makes every block an independent gzip member.
Adds 0.5\(en1% to output size. Unlocks parallel decompression for pure stdin
streams where the compressor can't seek.
.PP
If you are not sure, leave it at 128K.
.
.SH BACKENDS AND WHAT RUNS WHERE
gzippy has four compression backends and five decompression backends. You
do not pick them \(em gzippy picks for you. You can see the choice with
.BR "GZIPPY_DEBUG=1" .
.PP
.TS
l l l.
Backend	When	Notes
\_	\_	\_
libdeflate	L1\(en6, parallel	30\(en50% faster than zlib
zlib-ng	L7\(en9	SIMD-optimized, gzip-ng compatible
ISA-L	L0\(en3, x86_64	Intel's SIMD assembly, fastest at low levels
libdeflate high	L10\(en12	Near-zopfli at tractable speed
.TE
.PP
Decompression:
.TS
l l.
When	Path
\_	\_
"GZ" subfield	Parallel libdeflate (Tmax)
Multi-member, -p1	Sequential libdeflate, member-by-member
Multi-member, -p>1	Parallel libdeflate (Tmax)
Single-member, x86_64	ISA-L streaming inflate
Single-member, > 1 GB	zlib-ng streaming
Single-member, default	libdeflate one-shot
.TE
.
.SH SCORE CARD
As of February 2026 the in-tree cloud fleet benchmark stands at
.B "47 wins / 13 losses"
against pigz and gzip across levels, sizes, and platforms. The honest
breakdown of the losses:
.PP
.TS
l l l.
Category	Losses	Gap
\_	\_	\_
T1 decompress near-parity	2	<2%, noise
Tmax single-member parallel	8	\-23% to \-40%
L1 T1 compress vs igzip	2	\-63% to \-74%
arm64 L1 Tmax compress	1	\-3.3%
.TE
.PP
The Tmax single-member gap is a pipeline architecture limit, not a bug.
Fixing it requires speculative parallel decode, which is live work (see
the
.B parallel_single_member
experiment in the source tree). The L1 T1 vs igzip gap is AVX-512
hand-assembly territory; gzippy's own ISA-L path is a couple of generations
behind.
.PP
Translation: on everything you are likely to throw at it, gzippy is the
fastest. On a narrow slice of single-member Tmax decode, pigz is still
ahead.
.
.SH COMMON RECIPES
.SS Log rotation
.EX
gzippy -1 -f /var/log/*.log
.EE
.PP
Fast level, force (logs get rewritten), no thread limit.
.SS Backup an entire directory tree
.EX
tar c my-dir | gzippy -9 -p$(nproc) > my-dir.tgz
.EE
.PP
Best ratio, every core.
.SS Ship a release tarball
.EX
tar c release | gzippy --max > release.tar.gz
.EE
.PP
Smallest output. Readers do not need anything special.
.SS Stream to S3
.EX
pg_dump mydb | gzippy -6 | aws s3 cp - s3://bucket/dump.gz
.EE
.PP
Default level, no disk. Use
.B -p1
if you want single-member output for downstream tools that do not cope with
multi-member streams (rare in 2026, but it happens).
.SS Inspect a mystery gzip
.EX
GZIPPY_DEBUG=1 gzippy -dc mystery.gz > /dev/null
gzippy -l mystery.gz
gzippy -t mystery.gz
.EE
.PP
Debug env prints the decode path. List shows sizes and the original
filename if the header stored it. Test verifies CRC.
.
.SH WHEN TO NOT USE GZIPPY
gzippy is gzip. If you care about ratio above all else, use
.BR xz (1)
or
.BR zstd (1)
at level 19+. If you care about latency on a single CPU, use
.BR zstd (1)
at level 1 \(em it is still 2\(en3x faster than any gzip. Gzip exists for
ecosystem compatibility; gzippy exists to make that compatibility cheap.
.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR gzippy (1),
.BR gzippy-format (5),
.BR gzip (1),
.BR pigz (1),
.BR xz (1),
.BR zstd (1)
.
.SH AUTHOR
Jack Danger Canty.
