.\" gzippy-format(5) — the "GZ" FEXTRA subfield wire format.
.TH GZIPPY-FORMAT 5 2026-04-24 "gzippy 0.1.7" "File Formats"
.
.SH NAME
gzippy-format \- the \(dqGZ\(dq FEXTRA subfield used by gzippy
.
.SH SYNOPSIS
.I any-valid-gzip-file
with an FEXTRA subfield whose two-byte ID equals
.BR "GZ" .
.
.SH DESCRIPTION
gzippy-format is not a separate file format. It is a convention layered on
top of RFC 1952 gzip. A gzippy file is a sequence of one or more gzip
members. Each parallel block is one member. Each member carries an FEXTRA
subfield that records the total size of the member.
.PP
Standard gzip readers ignore unknown FEXTRA subfields (RFC 1952 \(sc 2.3.1.1)
and decode the file normally. gzippy uses the subfield to find block
boundaries in the compressed stream without inflating, which is what makes
parallel decompression safe and cheap.
.
.SH LAYOUT
Each member begins with the standard gzip header. The subfield sits inside
the FEXTRA area, which is selected by setting bit 2 (0x04) in the FLG byte.
.PP
.nf
    Offset  Size  Field         Value
    ------  ----  -----         -----
      0     2     ID1 ID2       0x1f 0x8b
      2     1     CM            0x08        (deflate)
      3     1     FLG           FEXTRA=0x04, optionally |FNAME|FCOMMENT
      4     4     MTIME         u32 LE, unix seconds
      8     1     XFL           0x00
      9     1     OS            0xff        (unknown)
     10     2     XLEN          0x08 0x00   (8 bytes of FEXTRA data)
     12     2     SI1 SI2       'G' 'Z'     subfield identifier
     14     2     SLEN          0x04 0x00   (4 bytes of subfield data)
     16     4     BLOCK_SIZE    u32 LE, total member size
     20     ...   FNAME?        NUL-terminated, if FNAME flag set
      ...   ...   FCOMMENT?     NUL-terminated, if FCOMMENT flag set
      ...   ...   deflate data
      ...   4     CRC32         u32 LE of uncompressed data
      ...   4     ISIZE         u32 LE, uncompressed size mod 2^32
.fi
.PP
BLOCK_SIZE is the length in bytes of the entire gzip member \(em from
the magic number through the ISIZE trailer. A reader that has just finished
member
.I M
can skip to byte
.RI offset( M )\ +\ BLOCK_SIZE
to find the next member, without looking at the deflate stream at all.
.
.SH WHY NOT BGZF
BGZF (the bioinformatics block gzip format) uses the same FEXTRA trick with
the identifier
.BR "BC" .
gzippy does not emit BGZF for two reasons:
.IP \(bu 2
BGZF caps block size at 64 KiB. gzippy uses blocks up to 512 KiB for higher
throughput on low-redundancy data.
.IP \(bu 2
BGZF encodes block size as "this member minus one." gzippy encodes plain
block size, which is simpler and lets the u32 field address the full 4 GiB
range.
.PP
gzippy decompresses BGZF files correctly; see
.BR gzippy (1).
.
.SH REFERENCE STRUCT
A reader in C can locate the BLOCK_SIZE in 16 bytes of parsing:
.PP
.EX
struct gzippy_header {
    uint8_t  id1, id2;       /* 0x1f 0x8b                         */
    uint8_t  cm;             /* 8 = deflate                       */
    uint8_t  flg;            /* bit 2 (0x04) must be set          */
    uint32_t mtime;          /* little-endian                     */
    uint8_t  xfl;
    uint8_t  os;
    uint16_t xlen;           /* 8 for a bare "GZ" subfield        */
    uint8_t  si1, si2;       /* 'G' 'Z'                           */
    uint16_t slen;           /* 4                                 */
    uint32_t block_size;     /* little-endian, total member size  */
} __attribute__((packed));
.EE
.PP
If the file carries FNAME or FCOMMENT, they follow FEXTRA in the order
specified by RFC 1952 \(sc 2.3.1 and push the deflate stream further into
the member. BLOCK_SIZE accounts for them.
.
.SH VALIDITY
A gzippy file is valid gzip iff every member is valid gzip. gzippy itself
verifies on decompression:
.IP \(bu 2
The magic number on every member.
.IP \(bu 2
The XLEN and SLEN framing around the "GZ" subfield when present.
.IP \(bu 2
CRC32 and ISIZE on every member.
.PP
If any check fails, gzippy aborts with a non-zero exit status and an error
written to stderr. It does not attempt recovery; use
.BR gzip (1)
or a forensic tool to salvage a truncated stream.
.
.SH ENDIANNESS
All multi-byte integers in the header and in the "GZ" subfield are
little-endian, as required by RFC 1952.
.
.SH COMPATIBILITY
Every compliant gzip decompressor reads gzippy output. Verified against:
.IP \(bu 2
GNU gzip 1.10, 1.12, 1.13.
.IP \(bu 2
Apple gzip (macOS 14, 15).
.IP \(bu 2
pigz 2.6, 2.7, 2.8.
.IP \(bu 2
Go
.IR compress/gzip ,
Python
.IR gzip ,
Node.js
.IR zlib ,
libdeflate 1.19.
.PP
If a reader chokes on gzippy output, the bug is in the reader. Report it
upstream; gzippy emits only valid RFC 1952.
.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR gzippy (1),
.BR gzippy-tuning (7),
.BR gzip (1),
RFC 1952 (GZIP file format specification version 4.3),
RFC 1950 (ZLIB).
.
.SH AUTHOR
Jack Danger Canty.
