.\" gzippy(1) — the fastest gzip. Hand-written troff.
.\" Lint:   mandoc -Tlint man/gzippy.1
.\" Render: man -l man/gzippy.1
.TH GZIPPY 1 2026-04-24 "gzippy 0.1.7" "User Commands"
.
.SH NAME
gzippy \- the fastest gzip
.
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B gzippy
.RI [ OPTION \|.\|.\|.\&]
.RI [ FILE \|.\|.\|.]
.br
.B gunzip
.RI [ OPTION \|.\|.\|.\&]
.RI [ FILE \|.\|.\|.]
.br
.B zcat
.RI [ FILE \|.\|.\|.]
.br
.IR command
.B |
.B gzippy
.RI [ OPTION \|.\|.\|.\&]
.B >
.IR FILE .gz
.
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B gzippy
is a parallel gzip compressor and decompressor. It reads and writes RFC 1952
gzip streams that are byte-for-byte interchangeable with
.BR gzip (1),
.BR pigz (1),
and every other gzip implementation in existence \(em including the one
baked into your router.
.PP
gzippy aims to be the fastest gzip ever written. On a 14-core laptop it
compresses a 211 MB log file in 0.07 seconds. Decompression runs at
300\(en2000 MB/s depending on input and thread count. It uses libdeflate,
zlib-ng, and ISA-L under the hood, picks the right one for your data, and
spreads the work across every core you give it.
.PP
Parallel output carries a small FEXTRA subfield identified by
.BR \(dqGZ\(dq .
Standard gzip readers ignore it; gzippy uses it to find block boundaries
without inflating, enabling parallel decompression. The wire format is
documented in
.BR gzippy-format (5).
.PP
.nf
   +==============================================================+
   |   gzippy  <=>  <=   <=    <=     <=      the fastest gzip    |
   |   LZ77 reference window: references point backwards          |
   |   gzippy     <=     <=       <=         parallel, in Rust    |
   +==============================================================+
.fi
.
.SH INVOCATION AND MODES
gzippy chooses its mode from its program name, its flags, and its input.
.TP
.B gzippy
Compress
.I FILE
to
.IR FILE .gz
and remove the original (unless
.B -k
is given).
.TP
.B "gzippy -d, gunzip, ungzippy"
Decompress
.IR FILE .gz
to
.I FILE
and remove the compressed form (unless
.B -k
is given).
.TP
.B "zcat, gzcat, gzippy -dc"
Decompress to standard output.
.TP
.B "gzippy -t"
Test integrity by decompressing to a sink. Prints
.RI \(oq FILE :\ OK\(cq
on success.
.TP
.B "gzippy -l"
List compressed, uncompressed, and ratio for each
.IR FILE .gz .
Does not read from stdin.
.PP
With no
.I FILE
(or with \fB-\fR as a file), gzippy reads standard input and writes
standard output.
gzippy refuses to write compressed data to a terminal; pass
.B -f
to force it anyway.
.
.SH OPTIONS
Options may be clustered (\c
.BR -dcf )
and values may be attached to their flag (\c
.BR -p4 ,
.BR -b256k )
or separated by a space. A bare
.B --
ends option parsing.
.
.SS Mode
.TP
.BR -d ", " --decompress ", " --uncompress
Decompress.
.TP
.BR -t ", " --test
Test integrity. Implies
.BR -d .
.TP
.BR -l ", " --list
List compressed file information. In verbose mode the output is
.IR "method crc date time compressed uncompressed ratio name" .
.TP
.BR -c ", " --stdout ", " --to-stdout
Write to standard output; do not touch input files.
.TP
.BR -k ", " --keep
Keep input files. Default is to delete them after a successful operation.
.TP
.BR -f ", " --force
Force: overwrite existing files, follow symlinks, compress files with multiple
hard links, write binary to a terminal, decompress even if the suffix is wrong.
.TP
.BR -r ", " --recursive
Recurse into directories.
.
.SS Compression level
Trade time for size. Higher is smaller and slower. gzippy adds two levels
beyond gzip's 1\(en9.
.TP
.B -0
Store (no compression), full gzip framing.
.TP
.B -1 " \(em " -9
Standard gzip levels. Default is
.BR -6 .
.TP
.BR --level " " \fIN\fR
Set level
.IR N ,
0\(en12. Same as above for 0\(en9.
.TP
.BR --fast
Alias for
.BR -1 .
.TP
.BR --best
Alias for
.BR -9 .
.TP
.BR --ultra
Level 11 \(em libdeflate's near-zopfli mode at roughly pigz speed.
.TP
.BR --max
Level 12 \(em libdeflate's densest mode, closest to zopfli ratio.
Slower than
.BR --ultra .
.TP
.BR -H ", " --huffman
Huffman-only compression (no LZ77 matching). Fastest possible; worst ratio
that is not \-0. Useful when input is already well compressed.
.TP
.BR -U ", " --rle
Run-length-only matching. A middle ground between
.B -H
and
.BR -1 .
.TP
.BR -z ", " --zlib
Write zlib stream (RFC 1950) instead of gzip. Default suffix changes to
.BR .zz .
.TP
.BR -K ", " --zip
Write a single-entry ZIP archive. Default suffix changes to
.BR .zip .
.
.SS Parallelism and blocks
.TP
.BR -p ", " --processes " " \fIN\fR
Use
.I N
threads. Default is every online CPU. With
.BR -p1 ,
gzippy emits a plain single-member gzip; with
.B -p>1
at levels 0\(en5 it emits the "GZ" multi-block format for parallel decode.
.TP
.BR -b ", " --blocksize " " \fISIZE\fR
Parallel block size. Accepts
.BR K ,
.BR M ,
.B G
suffixes (e.g.\&
.BR 256k ,
.BR 2m ).
Default 128K. Minimum 1K.
.TP
.BR -i ", " --independent
Force fully independent blocks even when the compressor could share state
across them. Slightly larger output; enables parallel decompression and
random access on pure stdin streams.
.TP
.BR -R ", " --rsyncable
Insert periodic sync points so small source changes produce small rsync deltas.
Costs about 1% ratio.
.TP
.BR -Y ", " --synchronous
.BR fsync (2)
the output after closing. Slower; survives power loss.
.
.SS Metadata
.TP
.BR -N ", " --name
Save original filename and mtime in the gzip header, and restore them on
decompression. This is the default.
.TP
.BR -n ", " --no-name
Do not save or restore the original filename or timestamp.
.TP
.BR -M ", " --time
Save or restore the modification time (pigz-compatible flag).
.TP
.BR -m ", " --no-time
Do not save or restore the modification time.
.TP
.BR -S ", " --suffix " " \fISUF\fR
Use
.I SUF
instead of
.BR .gz .
.TP
.BR -C ", " --comment " " \fITEXT\fR
Attach
.I TEXT
as the gzip FCOMMENT field.
.TP
.BR -A ", " --alias " " \fIALIAS\fR
Record
.I ALIAS
for decompression. For round-trip tooling.
.
.SS Diagnostics
.TP
.BR -v ", " --verbose
Verbose. Repeat for more (\c
.BR -vv ).
Shows per-file compression ratio, throughput, and chosen route.
.TP
.BR -q ", " --quiet ", " --silent
Suppress warnings.
.TP
.BR -V ", " --version
Print version and exit.
.TP
.BR -L ", " --license
Print license and exit.
.TP
.BR -h ", " --help
Print brief help and exit.
.
.SH ROUTING
gzippy picks its encoder and decoder from the input, the flags, and the
platform. You can see the decision at run time with
.BR "GZIPPY_DEBUG=1" .
.PP
.nf
\fBCompression\fR
  -p1, -0 to -3, x86_64 with ISA-L .... ISA-L
  -p>1,  -6 to -9 ....................... pipelined encoder, single-member
  -p>1,  -0 to -5 ....................... parallel encoder, \(dqGZ\(dq multi-block
  -p1, all other levels ................. flate2 single-threaded
\fBDecompression\fR
  \(dqGZ\(dq subfield present .................. parallel libdeflate FFI
  Multi-member, -p1 ..................... sequential libdeflate
  Multi-member, -p>1 .................... parallel libdeflate FFI
  Single-member, x86_64 ................. ISA-L streaming inflate
  Single-member, > 1 GB, no ISA-L ....... zlib-ng streaming
  Single-member, default ................ libdeflate one-shot
.fi
.PP
This table is reproduced from the
.I Production Routing
section of the in-tree development guide; it is the source of truth for
which function runs your data.
.
.SH THE "GZ" FEXTRA SUBFIELD
Parallel output at levels 0\(en5 carries per-block metadata in an RFC 1952
FEXTRA subfield:
.PP
.nf
    +----+----+----+----+----+----+----+----+
    | G  | Z  | 04 | 00 | <block_size: u32> |
    +----+----+----+----+----+----+----+----+
      ID       SLEN   total size of the member
                      (header + deflate + trailer),
                      little-endian
.fi
.PP
gzippy uses this to find block boundaries without inflating. Any
spec-compliant reader skips unknown FEXTRA subfields and decompresses the
file normally. See
.BR gzippy-format (5)
for the full wire format and a reference C struct.
.
.SH ENVIRONMENT
.TP
.B GZIP
Whitespace-separated options prepended to the command line, as in GNU gzip.
.TP
.B PIGZ
Same, for pigz compatibility. Applied after
.BR GZIP .
.TP
.B GZIPPY_DEBUG
If set to anything, prints routing and timing diagnostics to stderr. The
simplest way to confirm which path ran your input:
.IP
.EX
GZIPPY_DEBUG=1 gzippy -dc mystery.gz > /dev/null
.EE
.TP
.B GZIPPY_TRACE
If set, emits a detailed per-phase performance breakdown of the BGZF
decompression engine. Noisy; turn it on only when you are chasing a
microsecond.
.TP
.B GZIPPY_SPEC_DEBUG
Diagnostics for the speculative-parallel experimental path. See
.IR CLAUDE.md
in the source tree.
.TP
.B DEBUG_POS
Byte offset in the compressed stream to trace during inflate, when built
with the
.B debug_decode
feature.
.
.SH EXIT STATUS
.TP
.B 0
Success.
.TP
.B 1
Any error: invalid argument, I/O failure, bad CRC, truncated input,
integrity-test failure, or a file that already exists when
.B -f
was not given.
.PP
A single
.B gzippy
invocation processing multiple files continues past a per-file error and
returns
.B 1
if any file failed.
.
.SH PERFORMANCE
Compressing 211 MB of logs on an M4 MacBook Pro with 14 cores:
.PP
.TS
l l l.
Tool	Speed	Time
\_	\_	\_
gzippy, 14 threads	~3000 MB/s	0.07 s
gzippy, 1 thread	~400 MB/s	0.53 s
GNU gzip	~360 MB/s	0.58 s
Apple gzip (NEON)	~315 MB/s	0.67 s
.TE
.PP
Decompression: 300\(en2000 MB/s depending on file type and thread count.
.PP
As of February 2026 the in-tree cloud fleet benchmark stands at 47 wins
and 13 losses against pigz and gzip across levels, sizes, and platforms.
The remaining losses are in single-member Tmax decompress (a pipelining
gap), L1 T1 compress vs
.BR igzip ,
and one small arm64 L1 Tmax case. See
.BR gzippy-tuning (7).
.
.SH EXAMPLES
Compress a directory as a tarball at the best ratio:
.PP
.EX
tar c big-dir | gzippy -9 > big-dir.tgz
.EE
.PP
Grep through a compressed log without decompressing to disk:
.PP
.EX
gzippy -dc /var/log/prod-2026-04-22.gz | grep -i error
.EE
.PP
Recompress every log older than 30 days, in place, keeping originals until
you are sure it worked:
.PP
.EX
find /var/log -name '*.log' -mtime +30 -print0 \\
    | xargs -0 gzippy -k -9
.EE
.PP
Make a rsync-friendly backup with four threads:
.PP
.EX
gzippy -p4 -R backup.sql
.EE
.PP
Ask what path gzippy took for a mystery file:
.PP
.EX
GZIPPY_DEBUG=1 gzippy -dc mystery.gz > /dev/null
.EE
.PP
Replace the system gzip with gzippy (your system, your call):
.PP
.EX
sudo ln -sf "$(which gzippy)" /usr/local/bin/gzip
sudo ln -sf "$(which gzippy)" /usr/local/bin/gunzip
.EE
.PP
Squeeze every bit out of something you are going to ship once:
.PP
.EX
gzippy --max precious.tar
.EE
.PP
List every
.BR .gz
in the current directory:
.PP
.EX
gzippy -l *.gz
.EE
.PP
Stream through a pipe without ever touching the disk:
.PP
.EX
pg_dump mydb | gzippy -6 | aws s3 cp - s3://bucket/dump.gz
.EE
.PP
Render a compression fingerprint of a file (see
.B ANALYSIS
below):
.PP
.EX
gzippy --analyze file.gz
gzippy --analyze --full bigfile.log
cat mystery.bin | gzippy --analyze -
.EE
.
.SH DIAGNOSTICS
Verbose output for a compression looks like this:
.PP
.EX
file.txt: 12.4% -- replaced with file.txt.gz (14 threads, 2.8 GB/s)
.EE
.PP
Fields: percent reduction from input size, replacement path, thread count
used, observed throughput.
.PP
.B -t
prints
.I FILE: OK
on success and the error reason on failure. Exit status is
.B 0
or
.B 1
respectively.
.PP
.B -l
output matches
.BR gzip (1)
column layout: compressed, uncompressed, ratio, stored filename. In verbose
mode it adds method, CRC32, and mtime. Ratios are clamped to
.BR \(+-99.9% .
.
.SH COMPATIBILITY
gzippy writes standard gzip. Files it produces decompress with every known
gzip, and gzippy decompresses every standard gzip file. It understands:
.IP \(bu 2
Multi-member streams, concatenated gzips.
.IP \(bu 2
BGZF (the bioinformatics block format).
.IP \(bu 2
Zopfli-compressed streams (decode only; compression is
.B --ultra
or
.BR --max ).
.IP \(bu 2
pigz's output.
.PP
The
.B "\(dqGZ\(dq"
FEXTRA subfield is a gzippy extension. Readers that do not parse it decode
the file normally \(em the subfield is in the optional FEXTRA area, which
RFC 1952 requires decoders to skip on unknown IDs.
.PP
.B Not supported:
encrypted gzip, gzip over non-seekable tape without
.BR -i ,
the legacy
.B .z
(pack) format, the legacy LZW
.B .Z
format (use
.BR uncompress (1)),
or the Windows
.B gzexe
self-extractor shell wrapper.
.
.SH ANALYSIS
.SS --analyze [\fIFILE\fR] [--full]
Render an ANSI-coloured compression fingerprint of
.I FILE
(or stdin) that also teaches you how to read it. If the input is gzipped,
gzippy decompresses it first so the visualization depicts the raw data
deflate actually saw.
.PP
The output has six layers, top to bottom:
.TP
.B stat card
Shannon entropy (bits/byte, 0\(en8) and LZ77 coverage (percent of bytes
inside a back-reference of length \(>=3), each shown as a labelled
progress bar with a qualitative tag (\fBLOW\fR, \fBHIGH\fR,
\fBEXTREME\fR, \fBMAX\fR, ...) and a plain-English hint. A third row
lists the number of matches, their average length, and their average
back-distance. A fourth row projects an expected gzip ratio from the
coverage \(em or, if the input was gzip, reports the observed ratio.
.TP
.B canvas
An 80\(mu20 grid (or the full terminal with
.BR --full )
with a left-side byte-offset ruler. Each cell's foreground colour is a
monotonic blue\(->cyan\(->green\(->yellow\(->red rainbow of the mean byte
value in that region \(em so similar colours mean similar byte values.
Each cell's glyph density
.RB ( "\ ·░▒▓█" )
is the fraction of bytes in that region inside an LZ77 match of length
\(>=3. Greedy matching, 32 KiB window, byte-verified \(em the same
decisions deflate's fast path makes.
.TP
.B colour legend
A horizontal byte-value gradient from 0x00 to 0xFF, tick-labelled and
annotated (\fIzeros\fR, \fIASCII\fR, \fItext\fR, \fIhi-bit\fR) so you can
read the canvas without guessing.
.TP
.B match-length histogram
Seven buckets from
.IR "3\(en4 B" " ("
literal repeats\^) through
.IR "129\(en258 B" " ("
deflate's hard cap\^), each with a percentage bar and a one-line hint at
what kind of content lives in that bucket.
.TP
.B back-reference-distance histogram
Five buckets from
.IR "1\(en8 B" " (tight loops)"
to
.IR "4\(en32 KB" " (long-range reuse)",
each with the same percentage bar and hint. Together the two histograms
tell you whether the file reuses short phrases locally or long phrases
globally \(em i.e.\&, whether LZ77 or Huffman coding will do the heavy
lifting.
.TP
.B fingerprint reading
Three short interpretation lines \(em
.BR shape ,
.BR reach ,
.B peak
\(em that turn the numbers into a sentence a human can quote.
.PP
Requires a 256-colour terminal. The output is safe to pipe into
.BR less (1)
with
.BR -R .
Redirecting to a file writes terminal escape sequences.
.PP
.B --analyze
does not touch any file on disk. It always exits 0 unless the input is
unreadable or empty.
.
.SH HISTORY
.B gzippy
was born in 2026 with one job: be faster than every other gzip. It is
named for the sound of a thing going fast past your ear. It stands on
.BR pigz (1)
by Mark Adler, libdeflate by Eric Biggers, zlib-ng, and Intel's ISA-L.
.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR gzippy-format (5),
.BR gzippy-tuning (7),
.BR gzip (1),
.BR gunzip (1),
.BR pigz (1),
.BR zcat (1),
.BR xz (1),
.BR zstd (1)
.
.SH BUGS
Report bugs at <https://github.com/jackdanger/gzippy/issues>.
.
.SH AUTHOR
Jack Danger Canty.
